BIO 231-01: Invertebrate Zoology (4 credits)
&&&&&Department of Science, Mathematics & Technology
Biology Program
Spring 2017 Lecture and Laboratory Syllabus
 
Lecture Days: 		TR: 	11:00 AM - 12:20 PM
Laboratory		R:	3:30 – 5:20 PM
Lecture Location: 	HMB N340
Lab Location:		HMB N345
Instructor: 		Dr. Adebowale E. Ogunjirin
    Instructor Office: 	HMB N447A  
Phone : 		(202) 250-2591 VP;     2022105014 (text)
e-mail : 		Adebowale.Ogunjirin@gallaudet.edu
Office Hours: 	T: 12:30 PM – 3:30 PM; W: 11 AM – 3 PM and by appointment. You can also stop at my office anytime between 8 AM and 4:30 PM without appointment; if I am available I will attend to you.

Course Description in the Undergraduate Catalog:
    Biology 231 (Invertebrate Zoology) is an advanced survey of the biology of invertebrates with an emphasis on comparative and functional morphology to include major features of body plans (multicellularity, symmetry etc), physiology, evolution, systematics, behavior of the invertebrates, a study of the reproductive strategies, development and diverse ecological adaptation strategies invertebrates exhibit. The course requires three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. A personal computer is required for homework assignments and quizzes to be completed on Blackboard in and outside classroom.

Prerequisite: BIO 108; or permission of instructor. Course Fee: $75

Introduction: 
    Invertebrates comprise at least 95% of all known animals. From their numbers and diversity alone, it is obvious that invertebrates are incredibly important. They are food for humans and other animals, they cause disease, they pollinate most of the plants we need and use, they affect global climate, some are important with respect to medicine. We cannot say enough about how important invertebrates are since we know so little about them! All people, but especially biologists, need to have a good working knowledge of invertebrates. If you are looking forward to a career in the fields of aquaculture; genetic engineering or biotechnology; environmental law; science journalism; high school teaching, museum, aquarium or zoological garden, public outreach positions such as interpretive naturalists for environmental education centers and national parks; you will benefit from this course.
    My goal for this course is that all participants learn about and come to appreciate the interdependence of vertebrate and invertebrate groups in more detail. This involves learning names and classification, and biology of each invertebrate phylum. This course will cover the molecular level to the ecological level of invertebrates. This course will give an insight into a typical day of biologists which include talking with students, debating issues with colleagues, laboratory work and field works. Students will be able to demonstrate their competencies in certain areas of the five Undergraduate Learning Outcomes.

 Specific Course Objectives:
     What should you be learning? This is a content-heavy course; the primary learning objective is therefore mainly to learn course content. However, we will attempt an approach that will not focus on memorization but an understanding of the evolution and current significance of the invertebrates. You need to learn thoroughly the information presented in lecture and lab about invertebrates, including being able to synthesize, organize and summarize such information into coherent thought processes. You need to be able to correlate what you see in lab with lecture materials.
 Course Materials:
i. Integrated principles of zoology 17th edition, by Hickman, Roberts, Keen, Eisenhour, Larson & I’Anson.      ISBN- 978-0-07-352421-4
ii. Laboratory Studies in Integrated principles of zoology 16th edition, by Hickman, Kats & Keen.      ISBN- 978-0-07-750888-3

Our course Blackboard site: Web and non-web-based readings or handouts posted on our course Blackboard.

Gallaudet email account – if you do not use Gallaudet email, please set your Gallaudet account to forward to the account that you use. 

    


Table 1. Minimum meeting hour for regular in-class 4 credit hour course
Credit hoursIn-Class hoursOut-of-Class hoursTotal Time4 Credit hours50 hours/semester
3.3 hours/week in lecture & laboratory100 hours/semester
6.7 hours/week150 hours/semester
What does 6.7 hours/week of work related to BIO 231-01 lecture and lab include? This includes formally assigned work, ~3 hours of pre-class work (reading and completing assignments), and work that you are expected to do on your own. This includes: reviewing class notes, pre-class readings, and resources; identifying ideas you don’t understand and working to understand these; coming to office hours as needed; studying with classmates (discussing ideas, quizzing one another). 
1Note that these are minimums as established by the university

Guiding Principles:
1. All students have the potential to become successful life-long learners.
2. Academic success requires your commitment, time and hard work.
3. You must accept your responsibility for your learning progress.
4. The best way to learn is through active learning.
5. Knowledge is Power
6. Knowledge is Safety
7. Knowledge is happiness
8. See Challenges as opportunities, the greater the challenge the greater the opportunity
Course Outcomes in relation to Five Gallaudet University (GU) Student Learning Outcomes
    What will you learn from this course?  The following is a list of skills and knowledge essential to academic development and success, both at Gallaudet and as a lifelong learner.  You will be assessed on how well you do the following:
Course ObjectivesLearning Opportunities Assessments ToolsGU
SLOProgram SLO1. Discuss the ecological and economic importance of species in each invertebrate phylum
Class Presentation

Written Research paper

Field tripResearch Paper Rubric
ASL Public Presentation Rubric
AAC&U Written 
Communication Rubric1.1 – 1.5 1, 3, 5



2.   Use “shared and derived traits” to deduce evolutionary relationshipsLaboratory activities

Group activitiesExam and assignment answer keys

Participation rubric22, 3, 43.   Describe distinct biological characteristics of invertebrate phyla and taxonomic classesGroup activities
Class discussion
Lecture
Microscope skillQuizzes, exams, and assignments answer keys3,45, 64a.   Observe invertebrates in their natural community 

4b. Describe the ecological interaction and conservation problem of invertebrate taxa. Video Presentation

Microscope skill

Field trips

Class discussion 
Presentation rubric

Participation rubric
55, 6

Class Assessment/Evaluation:
You will be assessed on how well you have master the content of this course in the following ways: 
    
    Course Assessment
Lecture 75%Laboratory25%Grand TOTAL100%
Lecture AssessmentOn-line quizzes10%On-line homework10%4 Lecture Exams25%Group Paper(s)5%Group Video(s)5%In Class participation (will use Attendance and participation rubrics)10%Final Examination:  Individual Semester Research paper 
  Individual Semester Research Paper Presentation10%TOTAL75%
Laboratory AssessmentLab works (exercise sheet, Short reports, etc). 15%In-Lab and out of lab Participation (includes field trips)10%TOTAL25%
There will be no surprises on exams! You will be provided with study guides containing my explicit expectations of you.


Due Dates:
    All assignments are due on the designated dates. Except at the discretion of the instructor, late papers will not be accepted.  




Grading System
    The new grading system (Table 2) for undergraduates can be found at https://www.gallaudet.edu/academic-catalog/registration-and-policies/undergraduate-policies/grading-system.html

Table 2. Undergraduate grading system for 2016-2017 academic year. A comprehensive list of the grading system can be found at Gallaudet website

GradePercentageGradePercentage   A93 and aboveC-73-76   A-90-92   C-70-72B+87-89 D+67-69   B83-86   D60-66B-80-82   FBelow 60 C+77-79




Class Policies:
    Professional Behavior:
The goal of an undergraduate education is to prepare you for the workplace and for postgraduate education. Therefore, part of your grade aim to foster behaviors and habits that will allow you to be successful. Prominent specific expectations for professional behavior includes:
o Arrive in class on time and attend all sessions.
o Ask appropriate questions and practice active learning.
o Be prepared and ready to participate when called upon.
o Treat each other with respect and civility
o Offer constructive suggestions
o Encourage learning and discussion among classmates and actively assist classmates during group work.
o Do not use iPhone, laptops, or other devices at inappropriate times.
o Sign as clearly as possible and ask for clarification when necessary.
Class Attendance Policy:
    You are expected to attend all scheduled classes for lecture and laboratory. You are responsible for keeping up with work in any missed class. If possible, you will be allowed 2 unexcused absences. Typically, you are late 5 minutes after the beginning of class.

Class Communication Policy:
    We will follow the University Communication Policy - each of us has the right and responsibility to understand each other. We will use and respect ASL and recognize that we have different visual communication needs. We will respect everybody’s signing style and do whatever is necessary to communicate clearly.
 
 Academic Integrity & Honesty Policy
    Honesty is an important trait I look for in others. The Gallaudet University Undergraduate Catalogue has an academic honesty policy that all students should be aware of. This policy can be found at http://my.gallaudet.edu/bbcswebdav/institution/Public/CUE-Academic-Integrity08-21-07.doc under Academic Honesty Policy. Your professors support this policy. Be aware that if a student is discovered doing unethical practices such as cheating on exams, providing false information or other unethical actions as indicated in the University Integrity & Honesty policy, your professors have the right to give a failing grade for the particular assignment or course, and/or recommend dismissal.
    As members of the academic community, we all have an obligation to tell the truth always.  When we don’t know the answer to a question, we say so.  When we borrow another person’s ideas or language, we say so.  We never lie, cheat, or steal.  Students who do lie, cheat or steal by copying another student’s work, faking data, or failing to acknowledge using another person’s language or ideas will receive consequences as spelled out in the policy.  Hence, it is important that you read, understand and remember this policy!

Americans with Disabilities Act
    Academic accommodations will be made in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act for students with disabilities. The ADA upholds and extends the standards for compliance set forth in Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to employment practices, communications, and all policies, procedures and practices that impact on the treatment of students with disabilities. 
    Gallaudet University is committed to providing all students equal access to learning opportunities.  The Office for Students with Disabilities (OSWD) is the campus unit that works with students who have disabilities to provide and/or arrange reasonable accommodations.  Students registered with OSWD, who have a letter requesting accommodations, are encouraged to contact the professor early in the semester.  Students who have, or think they may have, a disability (e.g. psychiatric, attention, learning, vision, physical, or systemic), are invited to contact OSWD for a confidential discussion at (202) 651-5256 (V/TTY) or at oswd@gallaudet.edu.   OSWD is located in the Student Academic Center, room 1220. Additional information is available at the OSWD website http://OSWD@gallaudet.edu. 
    Students are responsible to confirm that the OSWD staff brings the appropriate academic accommodation documentation to the professor. Ideally, this should be done by the end of the second week of classes, but no later than the end of the fifth week of classes. Accommodation may only be provided from the time the professor receives documentation until the end of the course. If the student is registered with OSWD but the accommodations documentation is not sent by this office to the professor in a timely manner, the student should send an e-mail message and written note to the professor, program director and chair of the department asking for asking for assistance and naming the OSWD staff member who is working with them and this person’s email address.

BE ADVISED: I do not look favorably on students who cheat. I dislike to see students fail, however, cheaters have no place at Gallaudet. Cheating can also have a negative impact on the remainder of your academic career here or at any other university you may want to attend and on those who observed you cheat. 
If you cheat, my choices are:
1. I may give you a zero for the exam or activity. This is not likely to happen. 
2. I may fail you for the course. Your academic advisor, the Chair of your program and the Dean of your program will be notified. 
3. I may fail you and record an “XF” on your transcript (this means “failure of the course due to academic dishonesty”). This will remain on your transcript for some time. If you participate on sports, your ability to participate will probably be affected. Everyone mentioned in #2 above is notified as well. 
4. I may ask that you be dismissed from the University for academic dishonesty. 
When you cheat, control over your grade goes from you to me.  When you work collaboratively with me, your passing the course is more likely than not because we work together! You are the one who can relinquish that control when you cheat and are caught. And if you ever say “this is the first time I’ve ever done this”, I would have to say that one time is one time too many. 
Class Cancellations or University Closings (Inclement Weather) 
    If class is cancelled for any reason, check the announcement section of Blackboard in case there might be specific instructions, which will be posted by class time if possible. Because it is my job to teach and yours to learn, we must stay on schedule. Therefore, even if there is no announcement, you should always assume that the schedule will remain as-is. 
    Up-to-the-minute information on the University status such as delayed openings or closings are posted at http://alert.gallaudet.edu. You can also sign up for these alerts to be sent directly to your e-mail or pager at http://dps.gallaudet.edu. 
    We frequently have snow days early in the spring semester, although very rarely in the fall. The weather in Washington, D.C. is harder to predict than in many other parts of the country. In the winter, temperatures hover around 32oF (0oC). A difference of a few degrees warmer or colder completely changes rain into snow, or snow into rain. So, don't be surprised if the university misses the mark in predicting when they should close and when they should stay open.

Title IX:
Gallaudet is committed to providing an environment free of all forms of discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking.  If you (or someone you know) has experienced or experiences any of these incidents, know that you are not alone.  Gallaudet has staff members trained to support you in navigating campus life, accessing health and counseling services, providing academic and housing accommodations, helping with legal protective orders, and more. Please be aware that many Gallaudet employees, including all faculty members, are required reporters.  This means that if you tell me about a situation involving sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, or stalking, I must report the information to the Title IX Coordinator.  Although I must report the situation, you will still have options about how your case will be handled, including whether or not you wish to pursue a formal complaint.  Our goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to you and have access to the resources you need.
If you wish to speak to someone confidentially, you can contact any of the following on-campus resources, who are not required to report the incident: 
(1) Counseling and Psychological Services (http://www.gallaudet.edu/counseling-and-psychological-services.html); 
(2) University Ombuds (http://www.gallaudet.edu/the-office-of-the-ombuds.html); 
(3) Student Health Services (http://www.gallaudet.edu/shs.html) and 
(4) Campus Ministries (http://www.gallaudet.edu/office-of-campus-ministries.html).
If issues arise related to this course, please contact me (see contacts above). The program director is Dr. Derek Braun. If you would like the assistance of an impartial third-party outside the department regarding a course-related issue you may contact the Office of the Ombuds. The Ombuds is available as a confidential and neutral resource to assist with the informal resolution of conflicts and concerns. The Office is located at Ely Center 113. Videophone: 202.559.5079. E-mail: ombuds@gallaudet.edu. Website: www.gallaudet.edu/ombuds 

Syllabus Change Policy and Disclaimers
    Changes, which substantially alter the assessment and grading of your work, will not be made.  This syllabus is a course guide.  However, if bad weather or other events occur alternative options will be provided while retaining the original assessment methods. 
    The course, schedule, and assignment deadline dates are subject to reasonable change by the instructors at any time.  These changes may be announced during class session or in Blackboard.  It is your responsibility to be aware of any announcement.
    




Lecture and Laboratory schedule 
Date
UnitPre-Class Quiz & homework
(Su: 11:59pm)In-class/Lab ActivityNotes
1: Tues, Jan. 17Unit 1:
A: Introduction to Living Animals










B. Continuity and Evolution of Animal lifeRead syllabusIntroduction
Individual Semester project
2: Thurs, Jan. 19
(Due Wed. 11:59pm) Homework
Challenge Quiz
Chapter 1 & 2i: Thurs, Jan. 19
Microscopy ILab book: Read pg. 3-8
Introduction to microscope3: Tuesday, Jan. 24Homework
Challenge QuizAssign group project

Chapter 34: Thurs, Jan. 26Assign Semester Project 

Chapter 6,7ii: Thurs, Jan. 26
Microscopy IIRead pg. 25 – 45
Measuring with ocular and stage micrometer5: Tues, Jan. 31Homework
Challenge QuizChapter 8 & 96: Thurs, Feb. 2
Exam Review
iii: Thurs, Feb. 2
Animal diversity in & around Gallaudet Hand out giving. 
Lab book reading Chapter 5 and experimenting in zoology (chapter 6)7: Tues, Feb. 7Homework
Challenge QuizUnit 1: Lecture Exam 18: Thurs, Feb. 9Unit 2:
Diversity of Animal life

A: Organization


B: Unicellular Eukaryotes


C: Sponges & Placozoans


C: Radiate AnimalsChapter 11
iv: Thurs, Feb. 9
Animal diversity – A display of major animal phylaCombine data from last week and formulate hypothesis. 9: Tues, Feb. 14Homework
Challenge Quiz
Chapter 1110: Thurs, Feb. 16
Chapter 12
v: Thurs, Feb. 16
Unicellular EukaryotesStructure and behavioral study11: Tues, Feb. 21
Homework
Challenge Quiz
Chapter 1312: Thurs, Feb. 23
Review: For exam
vi: Thurs, Feb. 23
Sponges and RadiataWhich sponge absorb the most?
13: Tues, Feb. 28Homework
Unit 2: Lecture Exam 2
14: Thurs, Mar. 2Unit 3: Diversity of Animal life


Acoelomorpha, Platyzoa and Mesozoa
Polyzoa, Kryptrochozoa




Molluscs






Annelida 
Chapter 14vii: Thurs, Mar. 2Flatworms: Planarian and TapewormRegeneration Experiment15: Tues, Mar. 7Homework
Challenge QuizChapter 1516: Thurs, Mar. 9
Chapter 16viii: Thurs, Mar. 9
Flatworms: Planarian and Tapeworm IIPresentation of experimental report17: Tues, Mar. 14
Spring BreakSpring BreakSpring BreakSpring Break18: Thurs, Mar. 16
Spring BreakSpring BreakSpring BreakSpring Breakix: Thurs, Mar. 16
Spring BreakSpring BreakSpring BreakSpring Break19: Tues, Mar. 21Homework
Challenge QuizChapter 1720: Thurs, Mar. 23Exam reviewx: Thurs, Mar. 23
Earthworm, leeches, MolluscaEcological study of the effect of detergents. Dissection21: Tues, Mar. 28Homework
Challenge QuizExam 322: Thurs, Mar. 30Unit 4: 

Arthropoda
Echinoderms & Hemichordates
Chapter 18:  Introduction to Ecdysozoansxi: Thurs, Mar. 30
Earthworm, leeches, Mollusca Part 2Making Poster Report23: Tues, Apr. 4HomeworkChapter 18
24: Thurs, Apr. 6Chapter 19xii: Thurs, Apr. 6
Brine Shrimp25: Tues, Apr. 11
Chapter 2026: Thurs, Apr. 13Chapter 20 & 21
xiii: Thurs, Apr. 13
Brine Shrimp II27: Tues, Apr. 18Homework
Challenge QuizChapter 21
28: Thurs, Apr. 20
Chapter 22xiv: Thurs, Apr. 20
EchinodermsDissection & Fertilization29: Tues, Apr. 25Homework
Chapter 2230: Thurs, Apr. 27Exam Review
xv: Thurs, Apr. 27
No Laboratory ActivityMake up laboratory
Final exam support31: Tues, May. 2
Lecture Exam 432: Final TBAFinal Exam
Final examinationSemester project Due: Presentation
& submit paper online
